CHAPTER XXVI OF PROVERBS, KING JAMES V.
This LibriVox recording is in the public domain, recording by Michael Packard.
As snow and summer, and as rain and harvest, So honour is not seemly for a fool.
As the bird by wandering, as the swallow by flying,
So the curse, causeless, shall not come.
A whip for the horse, a bridle for the ass, And a rod for the fool's back.
Answer not a fool according to his folly, Lest thou also be like unto him.
Answer a fool according to his folly, Lest he be wise in his own conceit.
He that sendeth a message by the hand of a fool, Cutteth off the feet, and drinketh damage.
The legs of the lame are not equal, So is a parable in the mouth of fools.
As he that bindeth a stone in a sling, So is he that giveth honour to a fool.
As a thorn goeth up into the hand of a drunkard, So is a parable in the mouths of fools.
The great God that formed all things both rewardeth the fool, And rewardeth transgressors.
As a dog returneth to his vomit, So a fool returneth to his folly.
Seest thou a man wise in his own conceit? There is more hope of a fool than of him.
The slothful man saith, There is a lion in the way, A lion is in the streets.
As the door turneth upon his hinges, So death the slothful upon his bed.
The slothful hideeth his hand in his bosom, It grieveth him to bring it up again to his mouth.
The sluggard is wiser in his own conceit Than seven men that can render a reason.
He that passeth by, And medalleth with strife belonging not to him,
Is like one that taketh a dog by the ears.
As a mad man who casteth firebrands, arrows, and death,
So is the man that deceiveth his neighbour, And saith, Am not I in sport?
Where no wood is, there the fire goeth out. So, where there is no tale-bearer, the strife ceaseth.
As coals are to burning coals, and wood to fire, So is a contentious man to kindle strife.
The words of a tale-bearer are as wounds, And they go down into the innermost parts of the belly.
Burning lips and a wicked heart Are like a potsherd covered with silver dross.
He that hateth, dissembleth with his lips, And layeth up deceit within him.
When he speaketh fair, believe him not, For there are seven abominations in his heart.
Whose hatred is covered by deceit, His wickedness shall be shewed before the whole congregation.
Whoso diggeth a pit shall fall therein, And he that rolleth a stone, it will return upon him.
A lying tongue hateth those that are afflicted by it, And a flattering mouth worketh ruin.